Image pyramids encapsulate two fundamental operations: down and up-scaling. Shrinking is the idea of blurring and sampling the input, and enhancing does the reverse by interpolating the blurred and sampled image in order to estimate the original. 

# Downscaling
The first operation convolves our input signal with a smoothing kernel then sampling the result. The blur creates a smoother version of the original, which reduces aliasing and high-frequency components. This allows us to represent blurred data with fewer samples than in the original. Spatial aliasing, in this example, is similar to temporal aliasing when observing the wagon-wheel effect. 

The pyramid name comes from the idea of **pyramid construction**, where in order to get our result image, we have to iteratively blur and then sample our image so it shrinks over time, where the size is similar to the shape of a pyramid (shrinking as you increase layers). For each successor level, the number of sample values is half that of the previous level. And for an image, if we sample every other row and column, each level contains a quarter of the samples in the predecessor. 

# Upscaling
In order to do this, we have to use interpolation. Interpolation is the approximate inverse of the blurring and sampling operation. 

# Laplacian Error Pyramid
When downscaling, we can use laplacians to store our error. In this case, error is the difference between estimates and the original, and we can construct an error pyramid to store information we lost. By adding it back, we are left with our original pyramid values. Interpolation will let us completely recover our image by using the error pyramid. 

This is especially useful for image coding and progressive transmissions. 