# Region Representations/Properties
Once we identify a region, we can use the properties of the region as input for a higher-level decision-making process. We can perform shape description analysis using boundaries, bounding boxes, extremal points, area, perimeter, compactness/circularity, moments, etc. 
# Boundary Coding
Regions can be represented by their boundaries (perimeter) instead of an image. The simplest form of encoding is a linear list of border pixels in each region. 
An alternative representation is **chain code representation**, which is a chain of directions to follow. Each list item is represented by a 0, 1, 2, or 3. It is essentially pathfinding where each number represents a direction. Note that we should never see a 0/2 or a 1/3 next to each other. This presents an issue, though, because what if we want to match an image but it is rotated? How do we rotate the whole string so it can recognize an image regardless of scale, position, and rotation? And what about internal boundaries, where the region has holes inside of it?
Another approach is to use **Quadtree** representation, which encodes the entire region instead of just the boundary. Each node in a quadtree holds a square region of the image, with one of 3 labels: full, empty, or mixed. This recurses at each level until we cannot subdivide anymore. Each node should become 4 smaller nodes until we reach leaf nodes (hence quadtree). We terminate early if a node is marked empty or full, because we know what the children will also be. Quadtree is not invariant to anything, but we can make it position invariant. 
# Medial Axis Transform
**Medial Axis Transform** is the idea of taking a binary region and defining it by its "skeleton". We can find a skeleton by, at a high level, taking the corners, shrinking it down, and connecting. It iteratively computes a skeleton by creating layers over time (similar to an onion), where higher layers are closer to the skeleton and lower layers are closer to the outside. It follows the formula $f^k(x,y)=f^0(x,y)+\text{min}(f^{k-1}(p,q))$ where k is the iteration and the $\text{min}$ function gives you the minimum value of the previous iteration of the 4 connected pixels. If on the boundary, we treat nonexistent pixels as 0. 
This does not give us our skeleton! This just gets us our map of layers. We get our medial axis with the function $f^k(x,y)\geq f^k(p,q)$. This works because we don't consider diagonals!
# Bounding Box
A **bounding box** is useful to have because it gives us a rough idea of where the region is located. It just encloses our region exactly with a rectangle. 
# Extremal Points
**Extremal points** occur in opposite pairs, where each pair can be represented as a line that touches opposite corners of a region. It is good for approximations of axis length and orientation. Kind of a more accurate bounding box. 
# Area
The **area** of binary region $R$ is defined to be $A=\sum_{(x,y)\in R}1$. A.k.a. the sum of every pixel. 
# Perimeter and Compactness
**Perimeter** $p$ of binary region $R$ is the sum of its border pixels. A border pixel must have at least 1 background pixel in its neighborhood. 
**Compactness/Circularity** $C$ is defined as $C=4\pi\frac{A}{P^2}$. 
# Centroid
**Centroid** of binary region is the average location of pixels in $R$. We can find it with $x_c=\bar{x}=\frac{1}{N}\sum_{(x,y)\in R}x$ and $y_c=\bar{y}=\frac{1}{N}\sum_{(x,y)\in R}y$. 
# Signatures
**Signatures** are useful for finding preliminary landmarks. It is the projection of image onto x or y axis, where $S_x=\sum_y B[x,y]$ and $S_y=\sum_x B[x,y]$. 
# Spatial Moments
**Spatial moments** are often used to describe region shape. We use $m_{pq}=\sum\sum{x^py^qI[x,y]}$ where $p$ and $q$ summed represent the order of the movement. It helps us find the middle point. Our centroid is defined as $\bar{x}=\frac{m_{10}}{m_{00}}$ and $\bar{y}=\frac{m_{01}}{m_{00}}$. 
# Central Moments
**Central Moments** are translation-invariant, defined by $\mu_{pq}=\sum\sum{(x-\bar{x})^p(y-\bar{y})^qI[x,y]}$, with $\bar{x}=\frac{m_{10}}{m_{00}}$ and $\bar{y}=\frac{m_{01}}{m_{00}}$. We also have second-order central moments that may be useful: $\mu_{20}$, $\mu_{11}$, and $\mu_{02}$. 
# Moment Ellipse Orientation
If we have an ellipse region, second-order central moments have useful orientation descriptions. It can tell us about width compared to height, etc...
The resulting orientation relationship is $\tan(2\theta)=\frac{2b}{a-c}$. 
# Similitude Moments
**Similitude moments** are invariant to translation and scale. 
It is represented as $\eta_{ij}=\frac{\mu_{ij}}{(m_{00})^{\frac{i+j}{2}+1}}$
We can use all of this for grayscale or real-valued images as well!

