Chatbots have many purposes ranging from being personal assistants to playing music or other automated controls, and more. They are divided into two main categories: *general-purpose* chatbots and chatbots built with a specific purpose (*task-based*). 

A chatbot's **architecture** may be *rule-based* or *corpus-based* (there are more, but they are too recent to be covered in this course). Rule-based chatbots follow pattern-action rules, and corpus-based ones are intended for information retrieval. 

**Task-based** (goal-based) dialogue agents are assigned to help their users solve tasks, such as setting timers, making travel reservations, playing music, buying products, and more. 

They contain frames with slots and values as well as a knowledge structure representing user intentions. Essentially, they contain a table of **frames**, where each frame contains a slot, type, and question. The **slot** stores the category of answer needed, the **type** stores the type of information, and the **question** is the original sentence asked by the user. For example, if the chatbot asks, "What time would you like to leave?", the slot value may be "DEP TIME" and the type value may be "time". 

# Rule-based

Conversational agents must solve two implications:

- **Barge-in**, or allowing the user to interrupt. 
- **End-pointing**, or figuring out when the user is done talking. 

They also categorize the type of request into 4 types:

- **Constatives**: stating a fact in the present. 
- **Directives**: requesting the agent to do something. 
- **Commissives**: stating or planning a statement in the future. 
- **Acknowledgments**: expressing attitude or formalities (greeting, thanking, etc.). 

**Grounding** is the idea of establishing a common ground so that the user and agent both understand the information they have last exchanged. Essentially, this just means that when one party provides a piece of information to the other, the recipient should acknowledge that they understood that piece of information. Using an elevator as an example, when we press a button on an elevator, it lights up, indicating that it understands we have told it to take us to that respective floor. 

We can also note that conversations have structure! Conversational analysis gives us some simple structures called **adjacency pairs**, which are:

- Question-answer. 
- Proposal-acceptance/rejection. 
- Compliments-downplayment. 
- Subdialogues (nested conversations). 
- Presequences (context from prior conversations). 

Conversational initiative is the idea that in some scenarios, one party has the role of asking questions and the other has the role of responding to those questions. In normal conversations, we typically have **mixed-initiative**, or both parties are asking and responding to questions. 

ELIZA is a rule-based chatbot that organizes rules by keywords. It followed the Rogerian psychologist pattern and would take that keyword and transform it to ask the user about that keyword. 

PARRY is another rule-based chatbot and was the first to pass the Turing test. It was intended to be a computational model of schizophrenia. It gathered **affect** variables or measured fear, anger, and mistrust, which could be adjusted by the user's response. 
# Corpus-based

Corpus-based chatbots require corpora. They are separated into the following categories:

- Response by retrieval.
- Response by generation. 


