# Spectrum
**Imperative** languages are intended to "decide" what steps to take in order to achieve the programmers goals. A prescriptive attitude. You tell the language how it should do something. 

For **declarative** languages, we need to tell the language what we want, and it finds it. It often results in lower performance, but we can use a descriptive attitude to tell the language what we expect, giving us a higher level of abstraction. 

Imperative languages are traditional languages we are used to, and declarative languages are similar to python or SQL where we give it a query and it solves it for us. 

They are divided into 4 paradigms:
- Non-OO Imperative (C, Rust, Quandry)
- Object oriented (C++, Java, C#)
- Functional (Lisp, Scheme, ML)
- Logic (Datalog, Prolog)
# Implementation
How do we implement programming languages? We can do so via compilation or interpretation. 

Compilation takes the source program and "compiles" it into machine code such that the OS can run it. 

Interpretation is where we have a compiled program (the interpreter) that takes the source code and can interpret/run our source program. 

Either your source program is compiled into an executable or an executable "interpreter" takes your source code and runs it. 

Context-free languages use parsers
# Formal Languages
The basis for the design and implementation 

Context free grammar is where the left hand side of our mapping is a simple non-terminal. A terminal character is denoted by lowercase and cannot be broken down into anything else. A non-terminal should always be on the left side of our map and is able to be mapped to a combination of terminals and non-terminals

S->AB
AB->aABb
AB->ab
