# Immutable Quandary

**Immutable Quandary** is the default Quandary program when you don't add the `mutable` keyword. It disallows variable and heap mutation and only supports integer and reference types (`int` and `Ref`). In this case, the `Q` type is the supertype of integers and references. These are **static** types, so they are checked at compile time.

       Q
      / \
    int Ref

- `int` types are signed 64-bit integers.
- `Ref` types may be:
  - `nil`, which is a reference to nothing.
  - `(q . q)`, where q is a `Q` type.

#### Static Checking Rules

In Quandary, we check for the following rules before runtime:

- Integer constant _must_ have `int` type.
- `nil` has `ref` type.
- `<expr1> . <expr2>` must return `ref` type and operands are `Q` type.
- Built-in functions `left(v)` and `right(v)` take in `ref` types and return `Q` types.
- Explicit downcasts are required (`left((Ref)right(<expr>)`).

#### Dynamic Checking Rules

At runtime, a `ref` type expression evaluating into an `int` type will result in an error and vice versa. Similarly,
At runtime, the following situations will result in an error:

- `Ref` type expression evaluates to `int` type.
- `int` type expression evaluates to `Ref` type.
- Calling the built-in functions `left(nil)` and `right(nil)` will fail.

# Lists

A list does not exist in Quandary. However, we can invent it by using the dot operator, nested. For example, the list $[1,2,3,4,5]$ can be represented in Quandary as `(1.(2.(3.(4.(5.nil)))))`.

A **list** is defined as:

- `nil` or
- `(x . y)`, where `x` is the first element of the list and `y` is a list.

Using this definition, we can create a list of any length, where the last element of a list is always `nil`.

# First-Class Functions

**First-Class Functions** are functions that can be passed as arguments to other functions, returned as values from other functions, and assigned to variables. Quandary supports first-class functions. The textbook definition of this is "using functions as regular program values".

# Externally Visible Behavior

**Externally Visible Behavior** is the behavior of a program that is observable by the user. This includes the input and output of the program. Possible behavior (in this course) is one of three things:

- The program terminates normally,
- The program terminates with an error, or
- The program runs forever.
