---
id: 5. Object-Oriented Languages
aliases: []
tags: []
---

## Classes and Objects

A class is a blueprint for creating objects (a particular data structure), providing initial values for state (member variables or attributes), and implementations of behavior (member functions or methods). The user-defined objects are created using the class keyword.

Classes have _methods_ and _fields_ (also known as _attributes_). Methods are functions that are defined within the class and perform some action on the object. Fields are variables that are defined within the class and store the state of the object.

Another central concept of object-oriented programming is **instances**, created through the keyword `new`.

### References

A reference is a value that points to the location of an object. It allows you to directly manipulate the object via its reference (in Java). In C and C++, we use **pointers**, which are simply a value that stores the address of another object or variable.

We can create new objects with the `new` keyword, which creates a new instance of a class and returns a reference or pointer of the object. During the process of creating a new object:

- A new instance/object of the class is created on the heap
- A reference/pointer to the instance is produced
- The constructor of the class is called to initialize the instance
- The reference/pointer to the instance is returned  
  In the case of references, either the address or some internal handle to the actual object is returned. For pointers, just the address is returned.

### Destruction of Objects

In languages without garbage collection (like C++), the programmer has to manually destroy every object with the `delete` keyword. In garbage collected languages, the GC will automatically reclaim dead objects, or objects that have no living references in code. This really just means that all variables defined do not reference that object, so there is no way for the code to ever recover it, so it is okay to destroy.

### Members

We have **instance** and **static** members. Instance members are members that are specific to an instance of a class, and static members are shared between every instance of the same class.

## Methods

Instance methods are specific to an instance of a class. They can access and modify the state of the class and may implicitly invoke the `this` keyword. We can call these methods through `class.method(params)`.

Constructors are special methods implicitly called during the creation of an object. They take in parameters that are used to initialize the object and return the object's reference or pointer.

### Inheritance, Polymorphism

Inheritance is the process of creating a new class from an existing class. When a class A inherits from class B, it takes the methods and attributes defined in class B and automatically includes those in A. However, class A can also declare new members within itself that are not present in B.  
However, constructors may not be inherited, and subclass constructors must call the superclass constructor. We can overload a method signature by defining the same method using a different set of parameters, and we can override a superclasses' method by redefining it in the subclass and using the `@override` keyword.

Polymorphism is the ability of a method to inherit differently from the same superclass. What it lets us do is define a superclass A and create multiple subclasses. For any subclass of A, we can define a reference/pointer of type A and have it point to any object in the subclass list.

Method invocation has two stages. At compile time, the method invoked will target the superclass referenced in code (polymorphism superclass A), and at run time, will search for the lowest level match until a method is found.

Abstract classes are a type of class that are allowed to contain abstract methods. These classes can be compile time targets but not run-time targets (because abstract methods cannot be run). We sometimes refer to abstract classes as concrete classes.

Interfaces are a type of class (similar to abstract classes) where every method is abstract. The purpose of an interface is to define a structure without completing any code logic. Interfaces can be compile-time targets.

Virtual methods are methods that can be overridden by subclasses. They are the default in Java and C#, but in C++ we have to use the `virtual` keyword.

### Static Methods and Fields

A static field is a single, shared field that is common to all instances of a class. It is not tied to any particular instance of the class. Similarly, a static method is not invoked on an object but invoked through the class statically (`A.method()` or, within `A`, `method()`).

An instance method is the alternative, where we invoke a method from a class.

## Implementation

In Java, the source compiler is `javac` and the bytecode interpreter is `java`. The compiler takes a `.java` file and outputs a `.class` file

Afterwards, the bytecode interpreter takes the `.class` file and runs it. Java uses _Just-in-time_ compilation to increase efficiency by not compiling anything until it is needed. Compilation is also _profile-driven_, where frequently executed items are compiled while everything else is interpreted.

## Lifetimes

Static fields and methods are created when the class is loaded and retained throughout the execution of the program.

Stack-allocated objects are created when the method is called and destroyed when the method returns.

Heap-allocated objects are created with the `new` keyword and are destroyed when the garbage collector determines that the object is no longer needed.
