---
id: 6. Types
aliases: []
tags: []
---

## Types

By default, a variable is just a string of bits. We can give variables more of a meaning by assigning them a **type**, which will correspond with a certain interpretation of that string of bits. A type is a set of computational entities with uniform behavior. We add constraints to types to enforce correctness and normalcy.

Type checking is the process of enforcing correct type practices such as:
- Built-in operators evaluating correctly on types. 
- Left and right-hand side must agree. 
- Number and type of procedure parameters must be correct. 
- Return types should batch the returned value. 
## Static Typing

A statically typed language is a language with expressions that have static types. These languages can perform **static type checking**, or enforcing type checking on code at compile time (before the program has begun running). For example, if we declare a primitive variable, the compiler will statically check it by making sure that the left and right-hand side types match. Most procedure calls are typically statically checked. 

On the other hand, some parts of the code cannot be checked until the program has started running. This is called **dynamic type checking**, where typing is checked before operating. Further, a **dynamically typed language** is a language where entities in code do not have static types at all. 

**Type-safe** languages are languages that refuse to perform an operation if the types do not match. In this situation, we cannot have type-related failures. Languages like C and C++ are not type safe and allow the user to perform any type operations on any type. 

## Polymorphism

There are two types of polymorphism: universal and ad hoc. 

Ad hoc polymorphism encompasses overloading and coercion. **Coercion** is where values of one type are silently converted to another type, such as in the case of integers to floating point types. Widening is the process of converting a value to a larger type (such as integer to float) and narrowing is the reverse process. We **overload** operators or functions by giving them extra functionality. Functions can be overloaded by redefining them but with a different set of parameters and operators can be overloaded by defining their new behavior for a new type. 

Universal polymorphism can be of two types: parametric and inclusion. **Parametric** polymorphism allows us to define generic types, where we can assign a set of types to one generic type. **Inclusion**, or subset, polymorphism lets us define subsets of types that extend the parent type. In object-oriented languages, this is typically expressed through class types, where a superclass is extended (or implemented) by a subclass. 

## Memory and Type Safety

To be type-safe, languages add implied methods that are called on the creation and destruction of the object to handle the allocation and deallocation of memory. These are automatically triggered by garbage collection or manually by the programmer. 