# Machine Learning
Machine learning is a computer program that can learn from experience with respect to some class of tasks and performance measure so that its performance in predicting tasks improves with experience. 

When should we use machine learning? Not when we have a totally reliable system. We should avoid machine learning when:
- It is not set up for success.
- simple problems.
- the problems are deterministic.
- the problems may be solved efficiently in other ways. 

# Data

Machine learning requires data to be able to learn and predict. The two types of data are structured and unstructured. **Structured** data is data that, in summary, can be fit into a table or grouped into relations. 

**Supervised** learning uses structured data along and *must* include a column for our prediction values. The goal of supervised learning is to feed input values along with our desired result into the program so that it can learn, based on the input values, what it should return as a prediction. 

[[08_gaussian_mixture_models#Unsupervised Learning|Unsupervised learning]] is similar in the sense that we give training data without a desired output. The goal for this is to see what the model comes up with on its own. 
# Components
Machine learning algorithms must include a model structure, loss function, and optimization. 

The **model structure** is the structure of the function that the algorithm learns. It could be represented by 

The **loss function** is what the algorithm uses to check performance. Its goal is to minimize the output of this loss function. It may measure things such as accuracy, precision, recall, cost/utility, squared error, likelihood, posterior probability, margin, normalization, entropy, KL divergence, etc. 

**Optimization** is the process of minimizing loss while also trying to maximize performance. In essence, it is trying to keep as much accuracy as possible while making it as cheap as we can to run. Often times this is replacing a much more complex algorithm with a cheaper and less accurate one (greedy search, gradient descent, etc). 