Purposes of git: 
- Track evolution of software
- Facilitate team-based development


# Local Repository Work

Your local [[Repository]] contains a [[Store]], [[Working Tree]], and [[Index]]. Each node in [[History]] is a complete snapshot of the entire project. 

Every [[Commit]] has a hash, which is comprised of 160 bits, “practically” guaranteed to be unique, and is able to be shortened if unique. 

Any name can be used for a [[Branch]], but it should be short and descriptive and must be unique. The default branch is *master* or *main*. *Head* is a special reference and points to a branch. It will be attached to a particular branch. Head points to what you are working on. 

## Commands

>[!Local Commands]
>`git commit`  -> [[Commit]] advances *head + [[Branch]]*. A new [[Commit]] is added to [[Store]], DAG is extended, and [[Working Tree]] and [[Index]] are not changed but now clean. 
>
>`git branch <branch name>` -> creates a new [[Branch]], pointer called \<branch name\> 
>
>`git checkout <branch name>` -> moves *head* to \<branch name\>
>
>__NOTE__: Only checkout other branches when [[Working Tree]] is clean. Doing so without committing, stashing, or discarding changes may result in loss of data. 
>
>`git add -all`  -> adds changes to [[Commit]]. Call `git commit` to commit changes. 
>
>`git merge <branch name>` -> merges head branch with \<branch name\>. May cause conflicts. 
>Changes from another [[Branch]] is brought into current [[Branch]]. 

## Types of Merges

### 1. Fast-Forward Merge
When Head is an ancestor of [[Branch]] to merge, head is brought to new branch.

### 2. Merge with no conflicts
When there are no conflicts, changes are combined. A new [[Commit]] is created, and the parents are both branches from merge. Head now points to this branch. 

### 3. Merge with conflicts
When there are conflicts, you must manually resolve the conflict. 

>[!Conflict Resolution]
>`emacs <file-name>` -> changes [[Working Tree ]]. 
>`git add <file-name>` changes both [[Working Tree]] and [[Index]]. 
>`git commit` to commit changes
>

# Distributed Work
Remote branches are hosted somewhere, and store 

>[!Distributed Commands]
>`git fetch <branch-name>` -> adds changesets to store, working tree is unaffected. 
>
>`git merge <remote-branch>` -> used after fetch, merge in remote changes. Remote repository is left unchanged
>
>`git log --oneline --graph --decorate --all` -> prints log of DAG as a graph with info
>
>`git pull <remote-branch>` -> A pull is a fetch combined with a merge. 
>Should prefer to use fetch + merge instead of pull because it allows for viewing changes and rebasing. 
>
>`git push <repository> <branch>` -> sends local commit to remote store
>Do not push to working tree, get remote store branch into local DAG before pushing. Fetch, merge, then commit. 

### Common Setup
A team of n-people has n+1 repositories. A central repository (e.g. Github, Azure DevOps, etc.) is cloned by each developer. 

>[!Git Setup]
>In order to use git, it has to be setup first. 
>```
>git config --global user.name "name"
>git config --global user.email e@mail
>
 >--- OPTIONAL ---
>
>sudo apt install meld
>git config --global merge.tool meld
>git config --global diff.tool meld
>
>--- USAGE ---
>
>git difftool \<commit-hash>
>
>```

>[!Initialize Central Repo]
>This will create a central repository. 
>```
>cd /project/dir/
>mkdir rep.git
>git init --bare --shared rep.git
>```

>[!Clone Repository]
>In order to do work, the central repository has to be cloned to a local machine. 
>```
>cd repo/directory
>git clone \<address of central repository>
>```
>

## Types of git development

### 1. Branch-based Development
Branches are used to separate the development process. Permanent branches are kept in the order: master, hotfixes, release-branches, develop, and feature branches. 
### 2. Trunk-Based Development
Branches are not kept. Less complicated, but can be more confusing and less organized. 

## Git Normalization
Problems between OSes may make git confused, so there are conventions to follow. 
1. Use \\n in the store only in text files only. 
2. Normalize with .gitattributes file

> [!More git features]
> `git stash push/pop` -> stashes changes so that you can return to them after changing branches or head
> `git reset --hard/dry-run/force <branch>` -> set up \<branch> return to that commit
> `git commit --amend --no-edit` -> replaces a lot of small fixes with one commit
> `git rebase <branch>` -> merges changes but uses current branch pointer as parent instead of branch parent when fork happened. 

