## Purpose

We want to keep as much styling out of HTML so that we can change content easily. 

## Syntax

CSS is *declarative* meaning it says how to do it, not how to compute it. More like a list of rules. 

A rule is a location with the style to use there
e.g.
```
h2 {
	color: darkred;
	background: gray;
	font-style: italic;
}
```

## Properties

We can change things such as *background, text, font, border, margin, padding, positioning, dimension, etc. *

## Shorthand

We can shorthand certain elements like margins. Instead of 4 lines, we can define `margin: Top Right Bottom Left`
or
`margin: Top Sides Bottom`
or
`margin: Top Bottom`
Other elemnts have shorthands like padding, border width, etc

## Mechanics

There are different ways to define CSS, such as: 
- Directly in the element `<p style="color: red">`
- In style in element
```
<head>
	<style media="screen">
		p {color: red}
	</style>
</head>
```
- Link to separate CSS file
```
<head>
	<link rel="stylesheet"
	href="file.css" media="screen" />
</head>
```

>[!INFO]
Declaring style for a tag will apply it to every tag in the HTML File. 


>[!SPOCOC]
>multiple rules for a single tag will combine them. 

## Inheritance

Children inherit many properties from parent by default like *weight, color, family, etc.*

Set global styles in root. 


## Layout Model

The Box Model:
### Margin
is the padding around an element from parent that can be overlapped. Two adjacent margins will collapse into each other. 
### Padding
is the space around the content that cannot be overlapped. It is defined by the content. Does not collapse. Can have a border that outlines the edges of padding. 


## Classes

We can define CSS classes so we can apply different styles to the same tags. We can define classes in the tag itself with `<p class="class_name">`

To define a class in CSS, use 
```
TAG.CLASS_NAME {
style...
}

or wildcard

.CLASS_NAME {
style...
}
```

>[!INFO]
>Conflicts must be resolved still
>Class name should reflect the intent

# Better Styling

## `<div>`

We can generalize classes by using `<div>`
By making a general class such as 
```
.warning {
style...
}
```
We can nest our content we want .warning to apply to like this:
```
<div class="warning">
	<h2>...</h2>
</div>
```

## `<span>`

Span is like div but for inline content

## Ancestors

If we care about where an element occurs in a tree, we can use ancestors in CSS:

```
This will look for warnings with university children
.warning .university {
style...
}
```
Paths can be changed with , . > + ~ and \[attr="thing"] \*= $=

## ID

ID is more unique than class. There should only be one element with a specific ID per page. 

```
CSS:
#ID {
style...
}
```

___

## Conflict and Priority

Inherited styles are overridden by selectors that match children. 
If multiple selectors match the same element:
1. The most *specific* rule wins
2. Remaining ties are broken by order of declaration
More specifically:
1. [[Location]] and Importance
2. Specificity
3. Declaration order
___
### Location
1. Author specified CSS
2. User specified CSS
3. Browser specified CSS
### Importance
1. User Important!
2. Author Important!
3. Author normal
4. User normal
5. Browser normal
### Specificity
1. Number of IDs
2. Number of Classes (+pseudo-classes)
3. Number of elements
### Source Order
1. Last rule discovered
___

## Explicit Inheritance

We can tell an element to inherit from parent: 
```
a { color: inherit;}
```

## Pseudo-classes

Virtual Classes can be declared. 
`tag:pseudo_class {}`
There are some standard ones such as: 
```
Classic
:link, :visited, :active
:hover, :focus
Structural
:nth-child(An+B), :nth-of-type(An+B)
:first-child, :last-child, :first-of-type
:only-child, :only-of-type
State of UI elements
:enabled, :disabled
:checked
Target
:target
Negation
:not(S)
```

## Pseudo-elements

`.class element::pseudo_element {}`
```
Match start
::first-line, ::last-line
::first-letter
Insert Content
::before, ::after
```
