## Floats, Grids, and Fonts

## Floating

We can disrupt top-bottom flow by adding `float: positon` to a block's CSS file. 

Because float only uses width, overlap may occur with the element below, so we can use `clear: position` to the bottom element's [[5. CSS]]. 

## Grids

We can use grids as a display property to arrange elements in [[5. CSS]]. The Parent element is the *grid container*, and style them with the [[5. CSS]] property: `display: grid`. Direct children are considered `grid items`. 
```
.wrapper {
	display: grid;
	grid-template-columns: 1fr 2fr 2fr;
	grid-template-rows: repeat(4, 20px);
	grid-gap: 20px;
}
<div class="wrapper">
	<div>1</div> <div>2</div> ... 
```
This example generates a 3x4 grid with gaps of numbers 1-n (max 12)
```
.top { grid-area:tp; }  
.sidebar { grid-area: sd; }  
#footer { grid-area: ft; }  

.wrapper {  
	display: grid;  
	grid-template-columns: 1fr 2fr 2fr;  
	grid-template-areas:  
		"tp tp tp"  
		"sd . ."  
		"sd . ."  
		"sd ft ft";  
}
```
This is more strict formatting. 

## Units

Absolute units are units such as:
`in, cm, mm`
`pt` (1/72 inch), `pc` (12 pts)
Avoid these because they change based on display and can cause issues. 

Absolute Resolution
`px`

Relative units:
`em` width of 'm' in element's font.
`ex` height of 'x' in element's font. 
Use `em` and `ex` as these are best practice. 

## Fonts

Font family should be called 'typeface'. 
A font is typeface + weight, slant, etc. 


## Properties & Metrics

Some properties include: 
`sans-serif vs. serif, kerning, size, m-width, x-height`.

## Whitespace

We want to make text as readable as possible, so we use whitespace to add space in between lines. Change this with `line-height` in [[5. CSS]]. 

A larger x-height is easier to read, but it takes up more line spacing. 

## Font Families

We should try to use the same font family for the whole site because it appears more cohesive. Times is harder to read on a monitor, so use Helvetica/Arial. These are easier to read but are very common. 

## Fallback

When defining font families, list alternatives in order of decreasing preference because not all computers may have every font. 

`font-family: Helvetica, Arial, "Limeration Sans", sans-serif`

## CSS3

We can define our own font-faces with a .ttf file. 

# Colors & Images
## Colors in CSS

Colors are attributed to different meanings: 
green - go, success, complete, solution
red - stop, failure, incomplete, problem
yellow - yield, warning, attention
bright - cheerful, playful, positive
dark - somber, serious, negative
warm - energetic, alert, active
cool - calm, tranquil, peaceful

## Color Theory

Colors are wavelengths in nanometers. We can only see 390-700nm. Certian nonspectral colors (pink, brown, white) result from the presence of *multiple* wavelengths. 

## Color Perception

Humans have 3 types of cones in our eyes so we see everything slightly different. 

## Metamerism

???

## CIE 1931

X

## Color Mixing



## Subtractive Color Mixing
is creating colors by using colors as a filter. 
We use a white light and then absorb the colors we want to not show up. 

## Additive Color Mixing
is using colors to create colors, like light. 

## Color Mixing sRGB



## HSL Color Wheel

(degree, saturation) → (30, 100%) is orange

## HSL Grid

()

## CSS Color Values



## Color Keywords



## Color Depth



## Quantization of Continuous Functions



## Quantization vs Dithering



## HTML Tag Attributes



## Image Representation



## Major Formats

GIF
- 8 bit, has transparency
- Animated
- Good for small file size
JPEG
- 24 bit, no transparency
- Good for photos, gradual gradients
PNG
- Lossless
- variable depth
- Good replacement for GIF with no animation
SVG
- Vector graphics
- good for crisp lines, simple logos, graphs

## Scaling Images



## Alternative: CSS







