### Static Site Generation
is using a program to generate HTML pages
e.g. Jekyll, Middleman, etc.

## Middleman
is a Ruby gem. 

Pipeline:
- `middleman init myproj` creates a directory 
- `bundle exec middelman build` compiles all the source files
- `rsync -avz --del myproj/build ~/WWW` moves program to production server

We use this for these reasons:
1. Allows for code reuse and single-point-of-control over change 
2. Enables authoring of content in a language that is more human friendly
3. Adds parameterized generation of markup and content

## Motivation 1

- Common headers & footers
- No need for copy paste

We can do this with [partials] 

### Embedded Ruby
allows us to run ruby code within our html. 

`<% CODE HERE %>` will execute code within
`<%= CODE HERE %>` will replace with the result of expression
`<%# TEXT HERE %>` will ignore (this is a comment)

### Generation 

How to generate:
1. Put source files in your source folder
2. Compile with `bundle exec middleman build`
3. This is all

### Partials
are segments of code that are used as building blocks for site generation. They are stored in \_PARTIALNAME.erb.

Inside contents should look like a chunk of HTML code and may include Ruby escaped code. 

We can access partials like this:
```
<body>
	<%= partial "navigation" %>
</body
```

Build a site using partials by including all them in the source directory. 

### Tricks

We can pass arguments into a partial by passing in a hash as a second parameter following the partial call. 

For example:
`<%= partial "banner", hash: {items here}`
In partial:
`<h3> <%= parameter1inhash %>`
`<p> Parameter 2 <%= "$#{parameter2} %></p>"`

### Layouts
are common structures of HTML pages. Uses yield to include page-specific template. (Put yield where non-default content goes)

For Example:
```
--in body
<%= partial "navigation" %>
<%= yield %>
<%= partial "footer" %>
```

## Motivation 2

HTML tags are hard to read and contains many common plain text conventions. 

### Markdown
formalizes ASCII conventions. 


## SASS
allows for CSS Magic Numbers: `$var_name: value;`
and allows for repeated ancestors: `.navbar { ul {} li {}}}`

### Motivation 3

Repeated content is hard to update. As a solution, we can generate content by reading data from files and loading them into variables. 

### Random Generation

When we are missing content, we can use the `lorem` gem to generate fake content as a placeholder. 

```
lorem.paragraphs 2
lorem.date
lorem.last_name
lorem.image('300x400')
```

### Helper Functions

`<%= link_to('Text', 'path') %>` => generates a hyperlink, has optional arguments

`pluralize 2, 'person'` => 2 people
Tag helpers
`tag :imp, src: 'path'` 
`content_tag :p, class: 'warning' do ... end`
Form helpers
`form_tag '/login', method: 'post'`
`button_tag 'cancel', class: 'clear'`
Asset helpers
```
stylesheet_link_tag 'all'
javascript_incled_tag 'jquery'
favicon_tag 'images/favicon.png'
image_tag 'padrino.png', width: '35', class: 'logo'
```

