## Thin Lens Model

The **thin lens model** is an idealization of the camera model using lenses. Real world models are complex, so we use this model to approximate them. 

The focal length $f$ is the distance behind the lens where parallel rays converge. We can think of these parallel rays as rays from infinitely distant sources. Points that satisfy the thin lens equation are considered "in focus". 

Points from different depths come into focus at different image planes. **Depth of field** is the distance between the nearest and farthest points that produce tolerable amounts of blur. As we increase the aperture diameter $d$ of our lens, our depth of field decreases. Because portrait mode on phones uses such a small aperture, post processing is required (specifically depth mapping) to simulate depth of field. 

## Projective Camera Model

The **pinhole camera model** is a theoretical model that results from reducing our aperture diameter to an infinitely small value. In this model, all objects are in focus and the object appears to be upside down on the image plane. 

**Homogeneous coordinates** results from adding one more coordinate to a position. We use these to project images onto other images. Because the image plane origin is not always at the principal point, we need to account for the offset. Points in space are often expressed in terms of the *world coordinate frame*, which represents the orientation of the camera. 

The pinhole camera assumes image coordinates are Euclidean and equally scaled in both directions. Cameras can have non-square pixels, so the number of pixels per unit distance in image coordinates are $m_x$ and $m_y$. 

The **general projective camera** adds generality by incorporating a skew parameter $s$, which is parallel to the x-axis. We refer to **extrinsic** parameters as being outside the camera and **intrinsic** as being inside the camera. Extrinsic parameters may be rotation matrix and translation vector, and intrinsic may be focal length, pixel sizes, image center point, and radial distortion parameters. 

We can estimate camera matrices and project them together. Once we calculate $P$, we are able to extract intrinsic and extrinsic camera parameters from $P$. 

**Radial distortion** is the term for the warping about the center we see in some cameras. So far, we have assumed there is zero radial distortion. We remove this distortion by correcting image measurements by a radial factor $L(r)$. 
## Additional Models/Effects

- Further away objects appear smaller.
- Parallel lines converge at horizon. 
- Forced Perspective.

**Affine** camera models are a special case of projective camera that preserves parallelism. Two such examples are orthographic and weak perspective projection. Within an orthographic projection, we assume all object points are all at the same constant distance from the camera (appropriate when the subject points are very far from the camera). **Weak perspective** projection assumes the relative depth of object points are less than the average distance to the camera. With this projection, it is assumed that every object point is a constant depth away from the camera. 