## Pre-OS
Before and through most of the 1940s, we didn't have an idea of what an operating system could be. The first computer, the **ENIAC**, was created in 1946 and had no operating system. The administrator had to submit punch cards that described the task. 

Entering the 1950s, we saw the introduction of the **mainframe**. These computers were large and expensive, shared by the whole organization, and introduced the idea of a basic operating system through the use of **common libraries** and **batch-run jobs**. Multiple users could submit more than one job, which would be run in a batch. 

The 1960s saw the creation of the minicomputer, requiring the invention of **system calls**, **THE**, **MULTICS**, **SOSP**, and **UNIX** (very, very important). The minicomputer was much less expensive and was shared by multiple users at the same time, leading to the invention of actual operating systems. It was around this period that many fundamental operating system concepts were introduced. 

## Invention
With the introduction of the minicomputer, important operating system concepts were introduced. In 1961, the **system call** was introduced, adding a separate **kernel mode** and **user mode**, improving protection against destructive and dangerous user actions. A few years later, Dijkstra introduced the **THE multiprogramming** system** in 1965, which gave us a **layered design**, **multiprocessing**, and **synchronization**. The same year, we also got **MULTICS** from MIT, GE, and Bell Lab with the ambitious goal of designing a perfect operating system for all. In 1967, the **ACM Symposium on Operating System Principles** (SOSP) was founded. In 1969, Dennis Ritchie and Ken Thompson created **UNIX**, one of the most important and standardized features in modernized operating systems. UNIX emerged as a hallmark of elegance and simplicity at the time operating systems were trending towards excessive complexity. 

The **personal computer** was introduced in the 1970s and was improved into the 1980s, with the popularization of graphical user interfaces (GUIs). Namely, Apple LISA and Windows 1.0 were released in 1983 and 1985, respectively. These two GUI-based operating systems 

The next major change was the introduction of Intel's **x86** architecture, introducing the 32-bit processor, flat addressing, and most importantly being the first processor capable of running Unix and Linux. 

## Internet
When we reached the 1990s, we finally began to connect our machines. The number of internet hosts exploded, and as a result, we began to work on **networking support** and **security**. Around the same time, we began getting multi-core processors, capable of much more compute than before. 

## Modern Day
In the 2000s and 2010s, we got distributed compute, touch screens, and energy efficiency. **Cluster** compute has since become popularized, being relied upon by most businesses to handle their web operations. **Mobile** computing is arguably one of the most important contributions, changing the way we handle our day-to-day lives. 