[[Hierarchical Storage Management]] usually implements tertiary storage with an array of tapes or removable disks. Frequently used files remain on disk, while large, old, or inactive files are archived to the [[jukebox]]. HSM is most commonly found in supercomputing centers and installations with large volumes of data. 

The defining characteristic of tertiary storage is **low cost** and **slower speeds**. It is typically built with removable media. Some examples of this are floppy disks and CD-ROMs. 

## Speed

Tertiary Storage's speed is defined by [[Bandwidth]] and [[latency]]. Because it is so slow, tertiary storage is best used for rarely used data and for long-term storage. 

## Reliability

A fixed disk drive is likely more reliable than a removable disk or tape drive. Additionally, an optical cartridge is more reliable than a magnetic disk or tape. However, a [[Head Crash]] in a fixed hard disk is more fatal than a failure of a tape drive or optical disk drive. 

## Cost

Disk storage is much cheaper than main memory. 

## Disk Types

### Floppy Disks
are thin, flexible, disks coated with magnetic material, enclosed in a protective plastic case. Most hold around 1 MB. They can be nearly as fast as hard disks, but are at greater risk of damage from exposure. 

### Magneto-optic Disks
are rigid platters coated in magnetic material. Lasers are used to amplify a magnetic field to record every bit. Lasers are also used to read data. The head flies much further than magnetic disk heads and the disk surface is coated in a protective layer of plastic or glass, helping prevent head crashes. 

### WORM Disks
can only be written once (Write Once, Read Many Times). They are made of thin aluminum film between two glass or plastic platters. Lasers are used to burn holes in the aluminum, meaning information can only be destroyed afterward, not altered. They are very durable and reliable. 

### Magnetic Tapes
are tapes coated in magnetic material. They are very old, and have a great [[latency]], and are mainly are used for backup storage. Once data is under the head, transfer rates are comparable to disk. 

Tapes are often presented as a raw storage medium, meaning they are not partitioned. A whole tape is typically reserved for one application, and that application must determine how to organize data. 

[[Seek Time|Locating]] data on a tape drive positions the tape to a specific logical block, not an entire track. The read position operation returns the logical block number where the tape head is. Tapes are *append-only*, meaning erasing part of a tape erases everything after that block. An End of Tape mark is placed after a block is written. 

## File Naming
on removable media is difficult, so the OS typically leaves the name space unresolved for removable media. It is up to the user or application to determine this. If a type of removable media is common enough, it may be standardized enough for all computers to use this. 


