## Background

Concurrent access to shared data may result in data inconsistency. We need to implement some mechanisms to ensure orderly execution of processes that share data. 

## Producer-Consumer (Bounded-Buffer) Problem

When we have a bounded buffer, a producer, and a consumer, we need to be able to ensure consistent data. 

Three things must occur: producer can only produce if buffer is not full, consumer cannot take if empty, and access to shared buffer must be mutually exclusive. 

## Critical-Section Problem

Some processes may have a [[Critical Section]]. If two or more processes are in their critical section at the same time, modified data may become inconsistent. 

All solutions to the critical section problem must implement [[Mutual Exclusion]], [[Progress]], or [[Bounded Waiting]]. 

## Peterson's Solution

Peterson's solution is a solution for concurrency between two processes. It assumes LOAD and STORE instructions cannot be interrupted. 

The two processes share a turn variable and flag array. Turn indicates which processes turn it is to enter the critical section and the flag array is used to indicate if a process is ready to enter its critical section. If a flag is true, then it means that the process is ready. 

```
do {
	flag[i] = TRUE;
	turn = j;
	while (flag[j] && turn == j);
	[CRITICAL SECTION CODE HERE]
	flag[i] = FALSE;
	[REMAINDER CODE HERE]
} while (TRUE);
```

## Synchronization Hardware

Most systems provide hardware support for critical section code now. Uniprocessors can disable interrupts, but on multiprocessor systems it would be too inefficient to do so. 

Most modern machines provide special non-interruptable hardware instructions. 

One modern solution is to use locks. When locks are in place, a variable may not be modified by any other process until the process that acquired that lock releases that lock. 

```
do {
	[GET LOCK]
	critical section
	[RELEASE LOCK]
	remainder section
} while (TRUE);
```

One way to implement a lock is  with **TestAndSet**. 
```
boolean TestAndSet(boolean *target)
{
	boolean rv = *target; //gets initial value
	*target = TRUE; //sets to always true
	return rv; //returns initial
}
do {
	while (TestAndSet(&lock));
	[CRITICAL SECTION HERE]
	lock = FALSE;
	[REMAINDER SECTION]
} while (TRUE);
```

A second way is with swaps
```
void swap(boolean *a, boolean *b)
{
	boolean temp = *a;
	*a = *b;
	*b = temp;
}
do {
	key = TRUE;
	while (key) swap(&lock, &key);
	[CRITICAL CODE HERE]
	lock = FALSE;
	[REMAINDER CODE HERE]
} while (TRUE);
```

Mutex locks use acquire() and release() to protect critical sections. They usually use [[busy waiting]] techniques to keep processes waiting. 

## Semaphores

A [[Semaphore]] S is an integer variable that has two operations: wait() and signal() (originally p() and v() because it was not in English). 
```
wait (S) {
	while (S <= 0);
	S--;
}
signal (S) {
	S++;
}
```

It can also be easier to implement with a boolean semaphore that behaves similarly to mutex locks. 

## Classic Problems of Synchronization



## Monitors



## Examples



## Atomic Transactions


## Bankers Algo

1. Max-allocation = need
2. Iterate through and find which processes can complete with available resources. 
3. Once one completes add allocation to available. 
4. 