>[!INFO]
>Finish first 16 slides

## Fragmentation

### External
The total memory space exists but is not contiguous
### Internal
More memory is allocated than needed but is not all used

>[!Fragmentation Reduction]
>We can reduce External Fragmentation with #compaction , which shuffles memory contents to place all free memory together in one large block

## Swapping

#backing-store is a fast disk large enough to accomodate copies of all memory images for all users; needs direct access to memory images
#roll-out-roll-in is a swapping variant used for priority-based scheduling algorithms, where lower priority proccesses are swapped out so more important processes can be loaded and executed

>[!Queue]
>The OS will host a #ready-queue of ready to run processes with memory images on disk

## Paging

>We can avoid external fragmentation by #paging main memory

#paging is where every process gets sliced into pages (all the same sizes logical units)
- each page has a __*byte offset*__ starting at zero
- page size is always a power of two
Pages can be anywhere in memory, so we use #page-tables to translate logical to physical addresses

#page-number-p is used as an index into a #page-tables that contains the base address of each page in physical memory
#page-offset-d is combined with *p* to define the physical address that is sent to the memory unit

## Page table implementation

#page-table-base-register (PTBR) points to the page table
#page-table-length-register (PRLR) indicates the size of the page table

>[!HOW TO FIND PHYSICAL ADDRESS FROM PAGE NUMBER]
>1. Get number in binary
>2. Split in half
>3. Left half is the index for page table, value is base address
>4. Right half is offset, add to right side of answer
>5. Answer = [base address] | [offset]

Issues with memory access problems are solved by cache called #associative-memory and #translation-look-aside-buffers

Some #translation-look-aside-buffers store #address-space-identifiers in each entry which uniquely identifies each process for protection

## Effective access time

#effective-access-time = $(1+\varepsilon )\alpha +(2+\varepsilon )(1-\alpha )=2+\varepsilon -\alpha$
Memory has #valid-invalid bit attached to every entry in page table

#shared-code is when one copy of read-only code is shared among processes, good for text editors, compilers, etc. 
#private-code-and-data is where each process keeps a separate copy of the code and data. The pages for the private code/data can appear anywhere in logical address space

### Hierarchical Page Tables
Logical space gets broken into multiple page table. Bigger memory spaces need more page tables
Two and three level paging scheme

#hashed-page-tables are common in address spaces that are >32 bits. Virtual page number is hashed into a page table which contains a chain of elements hashing to the same location. Virtual page numbers are compared to chain to find match. If match, corresponding frame is extracted. 
#inverted-page-table has one entry for each real page of memory. Each entry has virtual address of page stored in location and information about the process that owns the page. Less memory but more time needed to search page. 
