---
completed: true
next: "[[4. Relational Modelling]]"
prev: "[[2. Entity Relationship Model]]"
---
What if we added and used inheritance and other OOP concepts in our ER models? This is what an **enhanced** entity relationship model is!

Let's start by adding subclasses (children) and superclasses (parents). 

A **subclass** is a more specialized version of that entity. It inherits whatever attributes the parent has, and adds its own. We draw this with a branch that splits into all the children we want connected. At the split, we have an empty circle. 

We can enforce **disjointness**, or force an entity to only inherit one subclass, by drawing a d in that circle. If we want to be able to have multiple inheritances, we draw an o, representing **overlap**. 

In the singular branch before we reach the disjoint or overlap marker, we can draw a single or double line to represent **complete** or **partial** participation, referring to participation of the superclass in the subclasses. 

Creating subclasses is an instance of **specialization**, and creating a parent is called **generalization**. There isn't only one way we can classify a group, it just depends on where we start. 

# Forms

A **specialization hierarchy** states that every subclass must participate in a subclass and only one of them. It represents a tree structure or strict hierarchy. A **specialization lattice** allows subclasses to participate in more than one class or subclass relationship. 

A **multiple inheritance** is a subclass with more than one superclass. **Single inheritance** is the opposite. 

A **union** type, or a **category**, represents a single entity with at least one parent superclasses. It is essentially the combination of multiple parents into one class. 