---
completed: true
next: "[[5. Relational Algebra]]"
prev: "[[3. Enhanced Entity Relationship Model]]"
---
A **relational database schema** is the next step in designing a database. It takes the ER/EER model from the previous sections and turns it into a schema usable in a database. 

A **relation** looks like a table of values. One row in a relation is a **tuple**. Our attributes each become one column of the table. 

A **key** in a relation is a column that contains a unique value for every row in the table. This means that we can uniquely identify a row with the key. If we don't have one, we can assign a **surrogate** or **artificial** key, which is a sequential number index stored in an extra column. 

A **relational database schema** is the table definition we will use in our database. It's notated like this: `relation(attr1,attr2,...)`. It is fixed size and we consider the **degree** of the relation to be the number of attributes it has. 

The **domain** of a relation is all of the possible values an attribute can take. A **simple** domain is a set of atomic values whereas a **composite** domain is the cartesian product of simple domains. 

A **tuple** is an ordered set of attributes. Simply put, a relation is an unordered set of tuples. 

# Properties
Tuples have no inherent ordering because the relation they are contained within is a set itself. Tuples are also guaranteed to be unique within one relation! If we don't know a value in a tuple, we can fill it with NULL. 

Within a relation, tuples are unordered and unique, may have null values, and are interpreted as fact. 

A **superkey** of a relation is a subset where all the tuple values must be distinct. Think injective. 

A **minimal superkey** is a key for a relationship. Any removal of attributes from that key will remove its functionality. 

Since we may have more than one possible key for a relation, we call all possible keys **candidate keys**. The **primary key** is an arbitrarily chosen candidate key. We typically choose the smallest key. 

# ER to Schema Mapping
The *first* step is to convert all entities to relations. 

Create a table and place every attribute as its own column. The title of the relation goes on the top left, above the left-most column. Composite attributes should be broken into simple attributes, and derived attributes should be omitted. Our primary key attributes should be underlined. 

The *second* step is to map our weak entity types. For each weak entity type, we create a relation and add all its simple attributes. Add the partial key and primary key of parent as a foreign key. We can do this by creating an attribute named the same as the primary key and then drawing an arrow to the parent's matching primary key. 

The *third* step is to map our binary one-to-n relations. 

Take every instance of this and add a foreign key to the N side relation. Have this map to the primary key like in step 2. 

Step **four** is addressing binary one-to-one relationships. For each instance, we have three possible approaches:
- repeat many-to-one process.
- combine both into one relation.
- create a new table of foreign keys to relate them.

The next step (**five**) is to map our binary many-to-many relationships. 

To do so, we create a new table for the *relationship*. In it, we have two foreign keys that relate to the primary keys of both relations.

Step **six** is to handle multivalued attributes. 

To do so, we make a new relationship. The table should include a foreign key along with its attributes. 

Finally, for step **seven**, we have to handle the n-ary relationships. We make one relation for this, but have the primary key be the combination of all linked entities. We also need to treat these as foreign keys. Attributes are treated as normal. 

**Foreign keys** are a field in a relation that can uniquely identify a tuple in another relation. 

How do we map things from the enhanced version of the ER model?

Normally, we will add a new relation for a subclass and use the parent's primary key as a foreign key. We also add the attributes to the table. 

To map a union, we need to define a surrogate key. This goes in its own table and all participating entities should have a foreign key pointing to that surrogate key. 

# Constraints
We can define conditions on our database to ensure integrity of our data. 

A **domain** constraint forces every value in a tuple to be an element in the domain of its attribute (or null if allowed). 

Note that *every* primary key must not have a null value in it. 

By default (always), we have the key constraint on candidate keys stating that:
- keys must be specified for each relation schema. 
- keys must be unique for every tuple in any relation instance of that schema. 

If we use a foreign key, it must have the same values as the referenced primary key. However, it may be named differently than the primary key. 

Finally, we may define **semantic integrity constraints**, which must be expressed with a constraint specification language. These are specific to applications and are user defined. 

Beware of database operations violating these constraints!