---
completed: true
next: "[[7. SQL]]"
prev: "[[5. Relational Algebra]]"
---
# Informal Design Guidelines

## Guideline 1

Design relation schema so that it is easy to explain its meaning. Don't combine attributes from different entity/relation types into a single relation. 
## Guideline 2

Design relation schemas such that there is no redundant informations stored in a tuple and such that no update anomalies will occur. Group attributes into relation schemas. 
### Data Anomalies
*Insertion Anomaly*: In a combined database where two entities share a relation, we cannot edit one attribute until the other has at least one tuple. 
*Update Anomaly*: If we change one attribute, we must change that attribute for all tuples. 
*Deletion Anomaly*: If we delete all the entities related to another entities, all of its data is also gone. 
## Guideline 3
We should design relations such that their tuples have as few *null* values as possible. Attributes that are null may be placed in separate relations. 
Valid reasons to have null values:
Attribute is not applicable or invalid
Attribute value is unknown
Value known to exist but is unavailable
## Guideline 4
Relations should be designed to satisfy the lossless join conditions. No spurious tuples should be made with a natural join of any relations. 
Avoid generation of spurious tuples at any cost. 
# Functional Dependencies
We can write FD(n) x->y or FD(n):{attr} -> {attr2, attr3} where {attr} is a set of values that can be used to determine a set of attr2, attr3 which are other values. 
## FD Constraints
Effectively, x determines y and y is functionally dependent on x. each x in R is associated with exactly one Y in R. If for every unique value in x, the value in y matches, x might determine y. e.g. b1->c1 b2->c2 b2->c2 b3->c4 may hold, but a1->b1 a1->b2 a2->b2 a3->b3 may not because a1->b1 and b2. 

*Functional Dependency*: Definition. A functional dependency, denoted by X-> Y, between two sets of attributes X and Y that are subsets of R specifies a constraint on the possible tuples that can form a relation state r of R. The constraint is that, for any two tuples $t_1$, and $t_2$, in r that have $t_1[X]=t_2[X]$, they must also have $t_1[Y]=t_2[Y]$.
# Normal Forms

## Normalization of Relations
Should pass all 5NF tests
## Normal Form 1 (1NF)
1NF means that every column is *atomic*. For example, this means full names must be stored in two rows as Fname and Lname instead of nesting columns. 
### INF Normalization
Take any multivalued/composite attributes and move them to another relationship containing those values. 
## Second Normal Form (2NF)
Only a concern if we have composite candidate keys. 

2NF means that every non-key column should be dependent on the *whole* key. For example, if something has the superkey A,B, 2NF means that any other column is dependent on both A and B. 
#### Spurious Tuples
When decomposing, we want to avoid causing information loss. While still important, preserving functional dependencies is less of a priority. 
#### Validating Normalization
A normalization is valid if we preserve the dependencies and we don't lose information. 

## Third Normal Form (3NF)

3NF means that every non-key column is dependent on *only* the key. For example, if something has the superkey (A,B), every other column is dependent on *nothing* but A and B. 
### Normalization Steps
Eliminate any repeating groups/nested tables
Show functional dependencies
Identify candidate keys
If any functional dependencies are part of the key, return to 2NF
# Keys

### Informal Definitions
Data item/set of items that uniquely identifies a row in the table
*Natural Key*: Key formed with the attributes that already exists, like a SSN
*Composite Key*: Key of two or more attributes
*Surrogate Key*: Key with no business meaning
*Candidate Key*: Minimal superkey before the surrogate key is created
*Prime attribute*: attribute that is a member of any key of R
*Nonprime attribute*: attribute that is not a prime attribute
# Boyce-Codd Normal Form
BCNF is an extension of 3NF where unique set of columns must be a candidate key. 
## Fourth normal form (4NF)
No multivalued dependencies. No duplicate rows
## 5NF
No redundant tables, removes duplicate columns. 

