# Databases
A [[Database|database]] is a collection of similar data built for a specific purpose. It is *logically coherent*, meaning data is connected in a rational, logical manner. The data must have an *inherent meaning* such that the data as a whole can be described. For example, a set of data could be considered a collection of customers if it contains all the data about a customer. Finally, it must serve a *specific purpose*. 

A [[Database Management System|database management system]], or more specifically a *relational DBMS*, is software used to manage and access data. It is a collection of programs that enables users to create and maintain a database. It can be accessed by [[Application Programs and Queries|application programs]], or programs written by the developer. 

Using a database approach comes with the advantages of:
- Controlled redundancy
- Controlled access
- Efficient query and update processing
- Backups
- Enforcing constraints
- Enforcing standards
- Reduced application development time
- Flexibility
- Instant updates to information

However, there is a lot of overhead when it comes to databases. It requires more hardware, software, security, and levels of control that often aren't free. 

We shouldn't use a DBMS when:
- We only have one user
- There is limited data manipulation
- Speed is more important
- Requirements will never change
- We have limited storage capacity

Databases should be 
a. Self describing
b. Insulate between programs and data, data abstraction
c. Support multiple views of data
d. Allow for sharing of data and multi-user transaction processing
# Database System
A database system contains a complete definition of structure and constraints. 
It contains [[Metadata|metadata]] and a [[Database Catalog|database catalog]].
### Other Terms
[[Database Schema]]
[[Schema Diagram]]
[[Schema Construct]]
[[Database state or Snapshot]]

The purpose of a DBMS is to provide insulation between programs and data. Middleman software that has the same method of access between any program as long as the data needs to be the same. **DATA ABSTRACTION, PROGRAM-DATA INDEPENDENCE, MUTABLE**

The standard architecture is a three-tier client-server system architecture. Built out of Client (Web interface and GUI), Application Server (Application Programs and Backend processing and Web pages), and Database Server (DBMS, SQLite, SQL, Microsoft, etc.). 

Abstraction allows for support of multiple views of the data. Allows access restriction and is a subset of the database. 

### Three Schema Architecture
Made out of multi-user [[External View]], derived [[Conceptual Schema]], and base [[Internal Schema]]. 

[[Transaction Processing]]
