# A simple database model
A *database* is simply a collection of named data items. *Data granularity* refers to a field, a record, a table, or a whole disk block. The set of valid operations are *retrieve*, *change*, *read*, and *write*. 

# Transactions
A *transaction* is a logical unit of database processing. It is a set of [[Operations|operations]] that includes at least one *access* operation (read/write/delete). 

For example, the process of moving money from a savings account to a checking account would require the following transaction: 

``` Sample transaction
Read balance from checking
Read balance from savings
savings balance -= value
checking balance += value
Write balance to checking
Write balance to savings
```

Databases can receive transactions in any order, at the same time. This means a DBMS must be able to handle requests *concurrently*. 

Transactions may be submitted interactively or embedded within a program, and an application program may contain several transactions. It must have a begin and end boundary. 

Transactions have a set of basic operations:
- `read_item(X)`: reads DB.X into a variable
- `write_item(X)`: writes variable into DB.X

# Concurrency Control
We need to ensure that processes accessing the database concurrently behave correctly. We use the acronym *ACID* to handle concurrency in a database: 
**A**tomic - A transaction must be entirely performed or not at all. No half-completed. 
**C**onsistent - Database should end in consistent state
**I**solated - 
**D**urable - 
# SLIDE 11 - ?

# Conflict Equivalence

A test for transaction equivalence is *conflict equivalence*, where we make sure that two schedules have the same operations and they have the same order of any two ...