# eXtensible Markup Language

XML was created by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) for the purpose of:
- ease-of-use over web
- human-legible
- wide range of support in applications
- quick to prepare, process, and read

Markup language is used to annotate a document for some purpose. XML uses tags that are distinguished from the content of the document to provide that annotation. 

XML is similar to HTML and LaTeX in the sense that they all use tags to indicate *formatting*. The tags follow a defined structure in order to keep them separate from *content* in a document. 

XML is intended to be a general purpose, extensible language for storing *structured* or *semi-structured* data. 

A *tag* is denoted as an *element*. Elements provide the structure for a data, and elements may hold *values* and *attributes*. 

XML uses a *hierarchical* model, or tree structure. They may be represented as trees, where each element is a node and the data value inside is that node's value. 

Best practice for storing data in elements and attributes is as follows:
- Attributes should be used for information that describes or modifies and element. 
- Elements should be used to hold the actual data values. 

An element stores values like this: 
``` Sample XML Element

<Element_Name attribute_name="value" attribute2="value2">Data value</Element_Name>
```

# Document Types
There are 3 main types of XML documents: *data-centric*, *document-centric*, and *hybrid* XML. 

*Data-centric* XML is highly structured, contains many small data items, and is often used for data exchange. It can be used to create webpages dynamically out of a database and should follow a schema document. 

*Document-centric* XML has few structural elements and stores large amounts of text. It may have a schema, but it is not required. 

*Hybrid* XML contains features from both. Some parts may be highly structured, contain blocks of text or unstructured data, and may or may not have a predefined schema. 

We can also define an XML Document as a *schema* or *schema-less* document. 

*Schema* XML documents communicate semantic information about a document. It defines names for expected XML tags, required or optional elements, and nested elements. 

*Schema-less* XML documents are semi-structured and do not include a predefined schema. It is denoted by the attribute `'standalone'="yes"` in the top line of the XML declaration. 

Well formed XML should start with the XML declaration line (before root tag):
```
<?xml version="1.0" standalone="yes"?>
```

An XML document is considered *valid* if:
- It is well-formed
- It follows a standard schema (DTD/XML)

Document Type Definition (DTD) is the original method of specifying a schema definition. It is still in widespread use, and it follows a very simple schema definition language. 

```
<!DOCTYPE note  
[  
<!ELEMENT note (to,from,heading,body)> 
<!ELEMENT to (#PCDATA)>  
<!ELEMENT from (#PCDATA)>  
<!ELEMENT heading (#PCDATA)>  
<!ELEMENT body (#PCDATA)>  
]>
```

The DTD above is interpreted like this:
- !DOCTYPE note -  Defines that the root element of the document is note
- !ELEMENT note - Defines that the note element must contain the elements: "to, from, heading, body"
- !ELEMENT to - Defines the to element to be of type "#PCDATA"
- !ELEMENT from - Defines the from element to be of type "#PCDATA"
- !ELEMENT heading  - Defines the heading element to be of type "#PCDATA"
- !ELEMENT body - Defines the body element to be of type "#PCDATA"
- We can add constraints to children by putting a \*,+,? after a child attribute (like \#PCDATA above)
	- \* represents 0 or more of child
	- + is 1 or more
	- ? is 0 or 1 of this child

DTD has limitations. Datatypes in DTD are not general. DTD also has its own syntax, so it needs a special parser. Additionally, all elements must follow the ordering laid out in the DTD, and it has limited datatype support and validation. XML Schema fixes these! It also adds concepts from database models like keys, references, and identifiers. 

# XML Querying

We have built query languages so we can *select* and *manipulate* XML documents. 3 such languages are: 
- XPath
- XQuery
- XSLT

*XPath* is a simple query language used to select parts of an XML document. It is formatted similar to directories in file systems. Nodes are separated as '/'. XQuery and XSLT use XPath syntax as well. 
*XQuery* is an extension of XPath. It uses the same data model but allows for more complex and general queries. It adds support for:
- Joins
- Aggregate functions
- Conditional Branching
- FLWOR expressions (FOR LET WHERE ORDERBY RETURN)
*XSLT* stands for Extensible Stylesheet Language Transformations. XSLT is used to transform XML documents into other documents. I can convert XML to HTML, plaintext, formatting objects, and XML. XPath is bulit into XSLT. By changing XML into XML, we can use this to make changes to the XML data. 

