# Informal Design Guidelines

## Guideline 1

Design relation schema so that it is easy to explain its meaning. Don't combine attributes from different entity/relation types into a single relation. 
## Guideline 2

Design relation schemas such that there is no redundant informations stored in a tuple and such that no update anomalies will occur. Group attributes into relation schemas. 
### Data Anomalies
*Insertion Anomaly*: In a combined database where two entities share a relation, we cannot edit one attribute until the other has at least one tuple. 
*Update Anomaly*: If we change one attribute, we must change that attribute for all tuples. 
*Deletion Anomaly*: If we delete all the entities related to another entities, all of its data is also gone. 
## Guideline 3
We should design relations such that their tuples have as few *null* values as possible. Attributes that are null may be placed in separate relations. 
Valid reasons to have null values:
Attribute is not applicable or invalid
Attribute value is unknown
Value known to exist but is unavailable
## Guideline 4
Relations should be designed to satisfy the lossless join conditions. No spurious tuples should be made with a natural join of any relations. 
Avoid generation of spurious tuples at any cost. 
# Functional Dependencies
We can write FD(n) x->y or FD(n):{attr} -> {attr2, attr3} where {attr} is a set of values that can be used to determine a set of attr2, attr3 which are other values. 
## FD Constraints
Effectively, x determines y and y is functionally dependent on x. each x in R is associated with exactly one Y in R. If for every unique value in x, the value in y matches, x might determine y. e.g. b1->c1 b2->c2 b2->c2 b3->c4 may hold, but a1->b1 a1->b2 a2->b2 a3->b3 may not because a1->b1 and b2. 

*Functional Dependency*: Definition. A functional dependency, denoted by X-> Y, between two sets of attributes X and Y that are subsets of R specifies a constraint on the possible tuples that can form a relation state r of R. The constraint is that, for any two tuples $t_1$, and $t_2$, in r that have $t_1[X]=t_2[X]$, they must also have $t_1[Y]=t_2[Y]$.
# Normal Forms

## Normalization of Relations
Should pass all 5NF tests
## Normal Form 1 (1NF)
All domain values in R are atomic. Bans composite and multivalued attributes. 
### INF Normalization

## Second Normal Form (2NF)
### Full and Partail FD

### Full Functional Dependency

### Functional Dependencies

### Decomposition

#### Spurious Tuples

#### Validating Normalizatino

### Decompose Relations

### Data anomalies solved

#### Insertion
#### Deletion

#### Update

## Third Normal Form (3NF)

### Normalization Steps

### Functional Depenencies

### Steps

# Keys

### Informal Definitions

### Superkey

### 2NF and 3NF with multiple candidate keys

### Normalization Steps

1. a

# Boyce-Codd Normal Form

## Decomposition Theorem

# Multivalued Dependency

## Fourth normal form (4NF)

## 5NF

# Join Dependencies with 5NF

