We use [[CSE3241 - Databases/Index|indexing]] in tables to speed up retrieval of information. They can speed up data accesses by orders of magnitude. Otherwise, we fall back on a *table scan*. 

# Joins and Indexes

We can use indexes to speed up simple queries, but we can also speed up much more complex queries, especially with joins. 

Databases use a persistent, stored index. It contains references to our data and we can define arbitrary indexes. Most DBMS software automatically indexes the primary key of a relation. 

We use 3 main approaches to indexing data in a relational database system: *clustering*, *hash-based indexes*, and *tree-based indexes*. 

# Clustering

Clustering is the process of rearranging our data. This makes it easy to look up queries that use a *range* of items. It really just *sorts in order*. It comes with the disadvantages of *only allowing one clustering per table* and *requires resorting on insert, delete, and some operations*. However, there is little extra information to store. 

# Hash-based Index

Another index method is building a *hash table*. 
We build a hash function that maps a value to a value, and then we can store values according to that in our index. We can have it take in a value and spit out an index that we are looking for. Hash indexes are optimal for finding values taht are based on *equality tests*. However, they are not good for range tests. Its worst case runtime is constant. 

# Tree-based Index

The third method is a tree based index. This sorts all our rows into a tree structure. It is optimal for looking up values based on *range* tests. May be slightly slower on equality tests. Worst case runtime is O(logn) for search, insert, and delete. 

# Costs

These are the disadvantages to indexing:
- Higher storage cost per index
- Higher time to create and index
- Costs time to update and index
- Need to specify optimal index to use
These are the benefits:
- Faster query speed
In summary, the best time to use an index is when we have a low update frequency in our DB. 



