# Convolutional Neural Networks

A convolutional neural network is a network inspired by biology.

# Convolution Operation

The convolutino operation, denoted with an asterisk, is an operation that takes two functions f and g and produces a third function that represents how the shape of one is modified by the other. It gives us a function that tells us how function 1 "convolves" into function 2.

The convolution operation is defined as:

$$s(t) = (x * w)(t) = \sum_{a = -\infty}^{\infty} x(a)w(t - a)$$

Where:

- x is the input
- w is the kernel
- s is the output

# Feature Map

A feature map is the output of a single filter applied to the previous layer. It is a 2D array of numbers that represent the presence of a feature in the input.

# Layer Loss

Each layer, as we go deeper into the network, we lose information. Any time we use a kernel centered around a pixel, we will lose dimensions because we are only saving the kernel output, not the edges of the image. To fix this, we can use zero-padding, where we add fake neurons or zero values to the edges of our image. This will help us control our network size.

# Sparseness of Connections

CNNs, when viewed from one layer to the next, have very sparse connections. A node at one layer is only connected to a few from the previous layer, so there is not much information. However, over multiple layers, that connectivity grows as more nodes merge to one.

# Pooling

Pooling is a technique used to reduce the dimensions of the input. It is used to reduce the number of parameters and computation in the network, and to control overfitting.

It controls dimensionality by taking a window and applying a function to it. The most common function is the max function, which takes the maximum value of the window. Other functions may include averaging, summing, and more. A **window** is the number of nodes that we want to include within each pool "node".

Pooling is also known as downsampling, spatial pooling, or subsampling.

# Max Pooling

Max pooling is a type of pooling that takes the maximum value of a window. It is the most common type of pooling. It is tranlsation invariant, meaning the network is able to identify the feature, regardless of the position.
