## Definitions

Unicode characters are separated into [[Glyph|glyphs]], [[characters]], [[Code Point]], and [[Binary Encodings|binary encodings]].

## Text

Text is a sequence of [[Glyph|glyphs]]. One character can have more than one [[Glyph|glyph]] that represents it, and one [[Glyph]] can be different [[characters]]. A unit of text can consist of multiple [[Glyph|glyphs]]. For example, 'é' is two glyphs. 

## Security Issue

If two characters share the same glyph, you can use them to register domains that look like the legitimate site that aren't truly the same. Combined characters can accomplish the same. 

Our solution to this is to warn users via the browser 

## Code Points

Each character is assigned a unique [[Code Point]]. Every code point is stored as its binary encoding. In short, a glyph is a representation of a character, which is assigned a unique code point, which is represented as an integer value of that code point. 

## Organization

[[Code points]] are grouped into categories (i.e. *Basic Latin, Cyrillic, Arabic, Cherokee, Currency, Mathematical Operators, ...*). The standard allows for 17 * 2^16 code points (0-1,114,111). Ranges from U+0000 to U+10FFFF. 

Every group of 2^16 code points is called a plane (the first two characters after the U+ are the plane). Plane 0 is defined as the *basic multilingual plane (BMP)*. 

## UTF-8

Encodes [[code points]] in a sequence of bytes (octets). These are variable length, which means you cannot infer number of characters from the size of the file. This is because some code points take more octets than others. 

UTF-8 is a non-endian encoding (just a sequence). 

## Encoding Recipe

You can encode two different ways. One byte code points begin with a 0 as its first bit and two byte encodings begin with 110 in the first byte, then have a 10 in the second byte. 

1-byte encoding: `0`110 1101
2-byte encoding: `110`1 0000 `10`11 1111

## Encoding Summary



## UTF-8 Security Issues

Overlong octet sequences should be shortened. Preceding zero pairs should be truncated. 

## Other Encodings



## ASCII



## ISO-8859



## Windows Family



## HTML 5 Standard



## Early Unicode and UTF-16



## Endianness



## BOM and UTF-8



## Zero Width Joiner


