[UIUC Systems Equivalent](https://www.cs.uic.edu/~jbell/CourseNotes/OperatingSystems/)

___
## [[2. CPU Scheduling|CPU Scheduling]]

### Average Turnaround Time
$$Turnaround_a=\frac{\sum (t-t_0)}{t_n}$$
where $t=\text{time task scheduled, }$
$t_0=\text{time task completed, and }$
$t_n=\text{total tasks}$

### Average Wait Time
$$Wait_a=\frac{\sum(w-w_0)}{w_n}$$
where $w=\text{time task resumed, }$
$w_0=\text{time task paused/scheduled, and }$
$w_n=\text{total entries}$

### Estimating CPU Bursts
$$\tau_{n+1}=\alpha t_n+(1-\alpha)\tau_n$$
where $\tau_{n+1}=\text{next prediction, }$
$\alpha=\text{weight where }(0\leq\alpha\leq1)\text{, }$
$t_n=\text{actual length of last burst, and}$
$\tau_n=\text{the last prediction}$. 

### [[Algorithms]]

#### First In, First Out
is a basic queue. Non-preemptive. 
#### Shortest Job First
looks for the shortest job in ready queue and runs it. Non-preemptive.
#### Shortest Time to Completion First
looks for the job with the shortest time to completion, including the currently running job. Preemptive. 
#### Round Robin Scheduling
uses a time quantum (a time constant) and rotates every job once that quantum has passed. Preemptive. 

___

## Contiguous Memory

### Address Indexing
$$\text{base}=p_0\text{ , }\text{limit}=p-p_0$$
where $p_0=\text{starting index of process and}$
$p = \text{ending index of process}$

### Algorithms
#### First Fit
Loads into memory at the first index that will fit process.  
#### Best Fit
Loads into memory at the smallest gap that will fit the process. 
#### Worst Fit
Loads into memory at the largest gap. 
___
## Memory Paging

### Number of bits for a [[Virtual Address]]
$$A_v=log_2(\text{size of virtual address space})$$
where $A_v=\text{bits in a virtual address}$

### Number of bits for a [[Physical Address]]
$$A_p=log_2(\text{size of physical address space})$$
where $A_p=\text{bits in a physical address}$

### Virtual Page Number
$$\text{VPN}=A_v-o$$
where $o=\text{offset}$

### Offset
$$o=log_2(\text{page/frame size})$$
### Convert Virtual Address to Physical Address
1. Set up page table
2. Convert values to binary e.g., $6_{10}=0110_2$
3. Split virtual address based on VPN and offset
4. Look up physical frame number in page table using VPN as index
5. Splice offset onto the end of your physical frame number
6. convert back to $\text{base}_{10}$

## Page Replacement

### Algorithms
#### [[10. Page Replacement Algorithms#First in First Out|First In, First Out]]
Page that was loaded in the longest ago gets replaced
#### [[10. Page Replacement Algorithms#Optimal|Optimal Algorithm]]
page that will not be used for the longest is replaced, requires knowledge ahead of time, so not for real-world use. 
#### [[10. Page Replacement Algorithms#Least Recently Used|Least Recently Used]]
page that hasn't been referenced for the longest gets swapped. 

## Disk Scheduling

### Algorithms
#### [[11. Disk Scheduling#First Come, First Served|First Come, First Served]]
requests are serviced in the order they are scheduled. 
#### [[11. Disk Scheduling#Shortest Seek Time First|Shortest Seek Time First]]
services the request that is closest to current head position. 
#### [[11. Disk Scheduling#C-SCAN|C-Scan]]
services requests starting from beginning of disk and travels to end of disk. Upon reaching the end, it returns to the beginning without servicing requests. 
#### [[11. Disk Scheduling#C-LOOK|C-Look]]
C-SCAN but only travels to requests, not the beginning or end of disk. 

## File System Implementations
### [[15. File System Implementation#Indexed Allocation|Indexed Allocation]]
Given a logical address $A_L$ and block size $b(m\text{ x }m-1)$, 
$$\frac{A_L}{b}=q\text{, where }q\text{ is the block of the index table and}$$
$$A_L\%b=r\text{, where }r\text{ is used below. }$$
$\text{Following, }$
$$\frac{r}{b}=q_1\text{, where }q_1\text{ is the displacement into q and}$$
$$r\%b=r_1\text{, where }r_1\text{ is the displacement into that block of the file. }$$


