(Chapter 12 Slide Set)

## File Control Block
is stored on disk near directory structure. When run, the kernel loads into memory this file. 
Loads file and locates based on human readable form, finds ID and loads. Number of opens are counted. 

[[Network File System|NFS]] is secondary storage if it contains your OS and is run on there, if it only contains data, then it is tertiary storage. 

## Virtual File System
treats everything the same. It provides an object-oriented implementation file system. It allows the same system call API to access different systems. 

## Directory Implementation
We can implement a directory with either a linear list or hash table. 
A linear list is just a list of file names with pointers to daat blocks. It is easier to program but more time consuming to execute. 
A hash table is a linear list with hash data structure. Quicker, fixed size. If there are too many hash table [[Collision|collisions]], it will increase in size. 

## Allocation Methods
There are three ways to allocate disk blocks: [[Contiguous Allocation]], [[Linked Allocation]], [[Indexed Allocation]]. 

### Contiguous Allocation
is **simple**, only a starting location and length are required. 
Calculate contiguous address: get logical address, divide by size of block? get quotient and remainder. add starting block to quotient, multiply by size of block, add offset.

### Extent Based Systems
Many newer file systems use modified contiguous allocation scheme. These file systems allocate blocks in [[extents]]. When a file hits another file, a new extent must be created. 

### Linked Allocation

Follow the links from start, 

A file allocation table helps with linked allocation


### Indexed Allocation
Starting block is always the index. It contains all the other block's indexes locations. 
Divide by 512 get Q,R. Q is the byte number. 



Finish up to page 26
