We can duplicate processes into threads to make processing faster. 
Threads share code, heap data, and files, but each have their own registers and stack space. 
Multithreaded processing improves responsiveness, economy, scalability, and allows for resource sharing. 
We can split server into two threads to listen and handle service requests. 

### Multithreading Models
#### Many→One
Many user to one kernel. The kernel thinks there is one thread, where many threads are mapped to one kernel thread. Includes Solaris green threads, GNU portable threads. 
#### One→One
Each user thread maps to one kernel thread. 
#### Many→Many
Many user threads map to many kernel threads. 
#### Two-Level Model
Many to many but allows certain threads to be bound to kernel threads, assigning one to one with that individual thread. 

User threads are user-level threads managed by user, not kernel. Kernel threads are supported by the kernel. 

[[Thread Libraries]] provide the programmer with an API for creating and managing threads. This can be implemented entirely in user space or a kernel-level library supported by the OS. 

[[Pthreads]] can be either user or kernel level. They are a POSIX standard API for thread creation and synchronization. Specifies behavior, leaves implementation up to the library. Common in UNIX. 

[[Java]] threads are managed by the JVM and typically are implemented using the threads model provided by the OS. They can be created by extending the thread class and implementing the runnable interface. 

### Threading Issues
Does fork() duplicate the calling thread or all threads?

### Thread Cancellation
We can cancel a thread [[Asynchronous Cancellation|asynchronously]] or [[Deferred Cancellation|deferred]]. 

### Signal Handling

[[Signal|Signals]] are used in UNIX systems to notify a process that some event has occurred. 

A [[signal handler]] is used to process signals. 

### Thread Pools

We can create a number of threads in a pool and have them wait on work. It is usually quicker to use premade threads than create new ones. This also allows the number of threads in an application to be bound to the size of its pool. 

### Thread Specific Data

Each thread can have its own copy of data. This is useful when you do not have control over the thread creation process (thread pool). 

### Scheduler Activations

MtM/TL models require communication to maintain, so they use [[Upcall|upcalls]].