Big Data is characterized by data with a huge volume, variety, and velocity. In this case, it is difficult to use traditional SQL data processing applications. NoSQL stands for not only SQL. With NoSQL, we can break the structure constraints of SQL databases. 

As a result, large companies have developed their own systems to handle Big Data. These new systems are characterized by:
- Scalability
- Availability, replication, eventual consistency
- Replication models (master-slave/master-master)
- Sharding of files
- High performance data access
- Schema not required
- Less powerful query languages

**Replication** creates additional copies of the data and allows for automatic failover into another node. **Sharding** allows for horizontal scaling of data writes by partitioning data across different servers with a shard key. This lets us write segments of the data in different areas, speeding up the process. 

This has its own share of problems, however. Network [[latency]] and replication can put load on the masters and sharding needs queries to be handled by an extra layer. This means we need lots of design overhead. 

# Structures
**Tabular databases** data in wide columns. The size allows for highly scalable architecture. 

**Key-value databases** allow us to store values with an indexed key. Users must perform query operations via key access. 

**Document databases** store data in key-value or document form. This is designed for document-oriented information storage, like JSON.

**Graph databases** are designed for highly complex and connected data that outpaces the relationship and join capabilities of a normal DBMS. It's designed to work well at finding commonalities and anomalies within large data sets. 

Instead of using ACID, NoSQL uses the BASE principle:
- Basically
- Available
- Soft State
- Eventually Consistent

It also follows the CAP theorem, or **Consistency**, **Availability**, and **Partition** tolerance. However, it is not possible to guarantee all three, so the designer has to pick two to enforce. 

