# Introduction
## History

JavaScript was developed by Netscape. Its purpose was to provide client-side execution within a browser. It has spread to other forms of Node.js.

### Includes

We can insert scripts into HTML explicitly by writing: 
~~~
<script>
	code here...
</script>
~~~

or

~~~
<script src="ProgramName.js"></script>
~~~

### Everything in JavaScript
is an object. Some objects are provided implicitly (in browser based JS) such as document, window, etc. 

Use `document.writeln()` to output into body and `window.alert()` to output in a popup dialogue. You can also prompt with `obj = window.prompt("prompt text");`. 

JavaScript shares a lot of syntax with Java, such as statement blocks {...}, parentheses in expressions (...), and comments // /\*...\*/. Semicolons are optional. Additionally, they share operators. 

### Primitive vs. Reference Types

JavaScript has a similar typing system to Java, where a variable is a slot in memory. Variables can be primitive or a reference to an object. 

Define a variable with `let VAR = VALUE;`. For primitives, variables are passed by value, not reference. Reference objects are passed by reference. 

>[!INFO]
>Arrays can be created as hashes and accessed as such: 
>`let a = {x: 1, y: 4};`
>`a.x //=> returns 1`

### Wrinkle
The JavaScript + and == operators attempt to make types match. For example, calling `3+"4"` results in 34. Additionally, `3 == "3"` is true. 

If we don't want implicit type conversion, use `===` to prevent implicit type conversion. 

### Dynamic Typing
JavaScript is dynamically typed, meaning you do not define variable types when defining a variable and do not define the return type of function. 

# JavaScript Functions

## Boolean Conversions
In JavaScript, 0 is false and anything else is true. This is extended to strings, where each string is cast to an integer to be evaluated. 

`&&` and `||` may not result in boolean value because `x || y` translates to `x ? x : y`. We can force conversion with `!!(x || y)`. 

>[!INFO]
>We evaluate objects by converting them to string and then evaluating those strings. 

### == Evaluation
- null and undefined only equals each other
- Strings, booleans are converted to numbers then evaluated
- NaN != NaN
- Objects need to be converted to value or string to be evaluated

>[!INFO]
>=== never coerces

## Functions
are objects and can be assigned to variables. They are defined with function as the prefix, and follow similar Java syntax. They can also be return values. 

### Arrow function expressions

We can define a concise anonymous function as follows: 

`(PARAM1, PARAM2, ...) => {CODE HERE}`
e.g.,
`(r) => { return Math.PI*r**2 }`

If there is one parameter, we can omit (), if there is only one line, we can omit return and {}. 

### Immediately Invoked Function Expression (IIFE)
Used for working around JavaScript scoping. Defines and invokes the function at the same time. 

`(function(){code here}();)`
Or
`let n = function(){code here}();`

>[!Modern JS]
>We prefer `let` to `var`. 


# 16. Arrays, Objects, Prototypes

## Arrays
### Indexing
JavaScript arrays start at 0, as they should. They can be indexed with \[\]. Arrays have length as a property. 

### Instantiation/Initialization
Create an array with `new Array(val)`. Elements in an array can be mixed type. We prefer to use array literals, e.g., `[var, var, var, ...]`. 

### Dynamics
JavaScript arrays have dynamic size (can shrink and grow). If we don't define elements, they are `undefined`. 

### Accessors and Mutators
Some array accessors and mutators include: 
```
- indexOf(e, startIndex]) //=> index of e, -1 if not found
- lastIndexOf(element[, lastIndex]) //=> last index of element, -1 if not found
- concat(a,b,c) //=> return concatenated object
- slice(x, y) //=> extracts subsection x to y
- join(a) //=> joins array separated by a
- push(a) //=> pushes a onto end of array
- pop() //=> pops from end of array
- shift() //=> removes from beginning
- unshift(a, b) //=> adds a,b,... to beginning
- splice(index, count, replacementvars...) //=> goes to index, removes and returns count vars, then replaces with following vars
- reverse() //=> reverses array
- sort([comparator]) //=> sorts array
- every(comparator) //=> returns true if objects that meet comparator specifications
- some(comparator) //=> true if at least one meets comparator
- filter(comparator) //=> returns array of objects that meet comparator specs
- map(function) //=> returns array of objects mapped to function return values
- forEach(function) //=> iterates over every object and operates function on them
- reduce(function) //=> reduces elements into one variable according to function specs-
```

## Objects, Methods, Prototypes
### Objects
An object contains properties, which are key value pairs. It is a partial map of properties. We can access an object's properties by calling the property name after a period. 

Objects have dynamic size, just like [[#Arrays]]. We can test for property presence in an object with `in`, where `property in obj == true` if `property` is a property in `obj`. 

>[!INFO]
>We can iterate over properties with
>`for (property in object) {}`

### Methods
The value of a property can be a primitive or reference, meaning a property can be a function. We can also define a method in a classic syntax. 
`methodName: function() {}`     or     `method() {}`. 

To access object properties within a method, use keyword `this`. 

Any function can be a constructor for an object. The naming convention for this is to capitalize constructors. 

### Prototypes
are included in every object. They are a hidden/indirect properties of an object. They are also objects themselves!

Finding a property in an object follows this order: 
1. Look for property in obj
2. If not found, search for property in obj's prototype
3. If still not found, look for property in prototype's prototype
4. Continue until reaching base object
5. Failure

Prototypes are also dynamic objects in addition to their children, however changing a prototype may change children too. 

We can assign an object a prototype by using a constructor on its variable. It just assigns the prototype reference slot to that prototype. 

Using a class and constructor is just a function declaration under the hood, but creates readability. 

# 17. DOM and Events
## Browser JS
Browser JavaScript should be kept separate from non-browser JS because it contains implicit objects that do not exist in other JS applications such as NodeJS. 

Browser JavaScript contains properties such as location (URL), status (text in status bar), history, innerHeight, innerWidth, alert(), prompt(), and document (tree of displayed document).

## Document Object Model (DOM)
DOM is a language-neutral API for working with HTML/XML documents. In JavaScript, tree nodes translate to objects. For example, `<input type="text" name="address">` translates to `{tagName: "INPUT", type: "text", name: "address", ...}`. 

### DOM History
DOM existed from the beginning of JavaScript. It served as the connection between the programming language and the document. 

## Simplest Mapping

Window has a document property that includes the following properties: 

```
write() //=> outputs text to document
forms //=> returns array age
anchors //=> all anchors in a document
links //=> all links in a document
getElementById(str) //=> find a node with str
...
```

## Node JS Object

A node is a JavaScript object that contains `parentNode, childNodes, firstChild, lastChild, nextSibling, previousSibling, innerHTML, tagName, attributes, name, id, class`, and `style`. It also contains the following methods: `appendChild(node), removeChild(node), insertBefore(node), hasAttribute(attr), removeAttribute(attr), getAttribute(attr), setAttribute(attr),` and `getElementsByTagName(name)`. 

## How to find a node in a tree

1. Find by iterating through an array of children (hard code)
2. Find by element's name attribute
3. Find by getElementById
4. Combination of all

## Interactive Documents

We need to add things like widgets, events, listeners to make our website useful. 

### Widgets
include buttons, windows, menus, etc. 

### Events
trigger for mouse clicked, window closed, button clicked, etc. 

### Event Listeners
wait for events to be called and execute actions to handle them. 

### Event Driven Programming
works in a loop. A program waits at idle, and when a user performs an action, that action generates an event, and that event is handled by an event handler. The program returns to idle afterwards. 

### Event Handling Mechanism
Event Handlers are divided into three parts: 
- Source: the widget which the user interacts with
- Object: encapsulated information about the occurred event
- Listener: a function that is called when an event occurs and responds with actions

The programmer must define an event handler and register that handler with the source element. 

## Event Propagation
In order to determine what called an event, event dispatch occurs in 3 phases: 
1. Capture
2. Target
3. Bubble

First, dispatch will traverse down the document tree (Capture) until the callee or smallest is located (Target). Code is executed, and then dispatch traverses up the tree to the top (Bubble), where the final code may be executed. 

Old JavaScript would define events with inline elements. With the introduction of DOM 1, we began to use the properties of DOM element objects to handle events. 

We can create a handler like this: 
```
let e = SOURCE_ELEMENT;
e.onclick = function_name;
//the only disadvantage to this is we can only have one handler per element 
```

DOM 2 introduces collections of handlers. The new syntax is this: 
```
let e = SOURCE_ELEMENT;
e.addEventListener("click", func, false);
//the disadvantage of this is some browsers will be incompatible. SOLUTION: use libraries
```

