A node (previously known as a minion) is a machine (physical or virtual) where Kubernetes is installed. It is known as a worker machine and launches containers via Kubernetes.

In the event of failure, a node may crash and go down, meaning there should be more than one node running. A cluster is a set of nodes grouped together such that if one node fails, the other nodes are still available to share the load. Each cluster has a master node, which is a node (with Kubernetes installed) that watches over the other nodes in its cluster and is responsible for the actual orchestration of containers. Containers are virtualized instances of an application, and there are usually more than one containers per node running at any given time.

Components

When you install Kubernetes on a system, you are actually installing an API system, etcd and kubelet system, scheduler, controller, and container runtime. The API system is responsible for acting as the frontend of the cluster, etcd is the key-value store and holds locks that prevent contingency between masters in the system. The scheduler is responsible for distributing containers and load between nodes. The controller is the "brains", responsible for managing failures, creating containers, and most management of the system. The container runtime is the application that is actually used to create the containers, typically Docker, but may be ContainerD. Kubelet is the agent that runs on each container in a node that is essentially a monitor application and makes sure that everything is running correctly.

Master vs Worker Nodes

A server becomes the master node because is has kube-apiserver installed. All other worker nodes will have kubelet installed. The etcd store, controller, and scheduler are installed on the master node.

The kubectl (cube control) is a command line tool that is used to deploy and manage applications on a Kubernetes cluster, to get cluster information, to get the status of another node, and more.

Kubectl run is used to run deploy an application on a cluster

Kubectl cluster-info is used to view cluster info

Kubectl get nodes is used to list all nodes that are part of the cluster