Magnetic disks provide the bulk of secondary storage in modern computers. They are characterized by their, [[Transfer Rate]], [[Positioning Time]]. Magnetic disks are prone to [[Head Crash|head crashes]]. 

## Disk Structure

Drives are addressed as large 1-dimensional arrays of [[Logical Blocks]]. 

The array of logical blocks is mapped into the sectors of the disk sequentially. 

## Operating System Issues

Operating systems need to manage physical devices and abstract a virtual machine to applications. 

OS show two abstractions:
- raw device which is an array of data blocks
and
- file system where the OS queues and schedules the interleaved requests from several applications. 

## Disk Scheduling

The OS wants to maximize fast access time and disk bandwidth. 
Access time is made up of [[Seek Time]] and [[Rotational Latency]]. 

### First Come, First Served

First in queue gets access first

### Shortest Seek Time First
selects the request with the minimum [[Seek Time|seek time]] from current head position. Meant to be used on smaller load disks.

### SCAN
starts at one end of the disk and services requests until it hits the end of the disk, then reverses and continues until it hits the start. 

### C-SCAN
is more uniform than [[#SCAN]] where instead of reversing, it returns to the beginning of the disk without servicing requests. 

### C-LOOK
is another version of [[#C-SCAN]], but only goes to the last request before returning to the beginning of the disk. 

### Selecting an algorithm

We want to choose the best algorithm for our purposes. [[#First Come, First Served]] is objectively the worst, so we eliminate that. [[#Shortest Seek Time First]] is a good option, but may lead to starving. [[#C-LOOK]] is a better version of [[#SCAN]], so we will select look over scan. 

Normally, [[#C-LOOK]] is chosen for high load systems and [[#Shortest Seek Time First]] will be used for lower load systems. 

## Disk Management

To manage a disk, we use [[Physical Formatting]] to divide up the disk. For an operating system to use a disk as storage, it needs to record its own data structures on the disk. It accomplishes this with [[Partitioning]]. Utilizes [[Logical Formatting]]. 

First, the [[Bootstrap]] is run, which loads the boot partition that stores the OS. During operation, if there is a bad block, it is handled with [[sector sparing]]. 

## Swap-space management

[[Swap Space]] can be managed by carving out of the normal file system or be placed in its own [[partitioning|partition]]. Normally, it is provided its own partition. In [[4.3BSD]], swap space is allocated when the process starts, containing the [[Text Segment]] and data segment. The kernel keeps track of swap-space by using [[swap maps]].  [[Solaris 2]] allocates swap-space by only allocating space when a [[page]] is forced out of [[physical memory]], not when the [[9. Virtual Memory|virtual memory]] page is created. 

## Stable Storage Implementation

A [[write-ahead log scheme]] requires stable storage. We can implement this by replicating information on more than one storage media with independent failure modes. Every time data needs to be changed, the information is updated in a controlled manner across all medias, such that we can recover the stable data after any failure during transfer or recovery. 

## RAID Structure

[[RAID]] provides reliability via redundancy. It is arranged into 7 different levels. It uses different techniques on each level to provide this redundancy. Some such techniques include [[disk striping]], [[mirroring]], and [[interleaved parity]]. 

## Disk Attachment

Drives are attached to a computer via [[I/O bus]]. Some busses include EIDE, ATA, SATA, USB, [[Fiber Channel]], and [[Small computer system interface|SCSI]]. [[Network Attached Storage|NAS]] systems may use common protocols such as [[Network File System|NFS]] and [[client-server model#Common Internet File System|CIFS]], and may be implemented via remote procedure calls between host and storage. [[Storage Area Network|SANs]] are becoming more common. 



## Storage Area Network