(Chapter 11 Slide Set)
There are two types of files: data and program. 

## File Structures

### Simple Record Structure
Simple records may be divided into lines and may be fixed or variable length. 

### Complex Structure
More complex file structures may be formatted documents or a relocatable load file. 
Both can be simulated by inserting control characters between data pieces. The operating system and program is in charge of handling these formats. 

## File Attributes
Files contain the following attributes: 
- [[Name]]
- [[Identifier]]
- [[Type]]
- [[Location]]
- [[Size]]
- [[Protection]]
- [[Meta Information]]
This data is normally kept in the directory structure, maintained on the disk. 

## What we can do to files
A file is an abstract data type. We can [[create]], [[write]], [[read]], [[reposition]], [[delete]], and [[truncate]] a file. Additionally, we can open and close files, which searches a directory or file and moves the content of that entry into memory to disk directory structure. 

### Opening and Accessing Files
In order to open a file, we need the [[Location|file pointer]], file-open count, disk location of the file, and its [[Protection|access rights]]. 

Some operating systems provide *open file locking*, which mediates access to a file. It may be [[Mandatory]] or [[Advisory]]. 

Once a file is open, there are a few ways to access it. Two methods are [[Sequential Access]] and [[Direct Access]]. 

## Disk Structure

Disks may be divided into [[partitioning|partitions]] and be protected by [[RAID]]. They may be used with or without a file system. An entity containing a file system is known as a volume ta, which keep track of every file and its details in a device directory or volume table of contents. There may be special-purpose file systems in addition to this general-purpose file system within one OS. 

## What we can do with a directory
We can search for, create, delete, and rename a file within a directory. We can also list a directory and traverse the file system. 

A [[single-level directory]] has problems, like issues with grouping and naming. 

We want to organize a directory logically to promote efficiency, convenience for users, and group files logically by properties. In order to achieve this, we give every user their own directory in a [[two-level directory]]. They have their **own path name**, can have their **own file names**, and allow for **efficient searching**. 

Furthermore, we can use a [[tree-structured directory]] that extends capabilities to allow for **grouping** in addition to everything else. Current Directory is the active, working directory and any operations performed are performed on the working directory. We can access directories with absolute or relative path name. 

Tree-structured directories can be extended to [[acyclic-graph directories]], allowing us to alias files from other subdirectories. In this system, there is an additional operation that creates and deletes aliases of files from other directories (Link and resolve). 

Finally, there is a [[general-graph directory]] that extends this further by allowing for backwards pointers to files. Normally, this could cause cycles of references, but if we don't allow directory links, this is not an issue. We also need to implement garbage collection and a cycle detection algorithm to make sure this is okay. 

## File System Mounting
A file system must be mounted before it can be accessed. An unmounted ile system is mounted via a mount point. These are used to link different directories. 

## File Sharing
We want to share files between users, so we use a protection scheme. We can also share files across a network, known as a [[Network File System]]. However, in order to implement this, we must give every user a [[User ID]] and a [[Group ID]]. 

## Remote File Systems

There is a common need to transfer files between systems remotely, so we use programs such as [[File Transfer Protocol|FTP]], [[Distributed File Systems]], and [[World Wide Web]]. A [[client-server model]] allows clients to mount remote file systems from servers. 

Remote File Systems also introduce new failure modes to handle network failure and server failure. This can be handled with state information for the status of each remote request. Stateless protocols such as NFS include all information for each request, allowing for easier recovery but less security. 

Two types of [[consistency semantics]] are [[consistency semantics#Andrew File System|AFS]] and [[consistency semantics#Unix File System|UFS]]. The file owner can control read, write, execute, append, delete, and list access of that file. 































