### Virtual Memory
*is the separation of user logical memory from physical memory.* 

Because all memory does not need to be loaded at the same time,
- the logical address space can be much larger than physical address space 
- memory can be shared between processes
- it is more efficient than process creation
We can implement virtual memory via [demand paging] and [demand segmentation]. 


### Demand Paging
*will only bring a page into memory when it is needed.* 

Results in: less I/O, memory, faster response, and more users availability. Demand paging utilizes a [lazy swapper] that never swaps a page into memory unless that page will be needed. 
If page is needed, reference to it
If reference is invalid, abort
If not in memory, bring to memory

Each frame has a #valid-invalid bit where valid means it is in memory and invalid triggers a [page fault]. 
### Page Fault
forces the operating system to determine if the page reference is invalid or just not in memory and to handle both cases. 
1. Reference to missing page triggers Trap
2. Trap is handled by OS
3. Page is in backing [[Project Store]]
4. Bring in missing page
5. Reset Page table
6. Restart Instruction
Effective Access Time (EAT) = (1-p)\*(memory access) + p(page fault overhead + swap in and out + restart overhead)
Page Fault Rate => 0\<=PFR\<=1.0, where 0 is no faults and 1 is every reference is a fault
Virtual memory provides other benefits during process creation such as ![copy on write] and [memory mapped files]. 
### Copy on Write
allows both parent and child processes to initially share pages in memory while having different. 

When either process modifies a shared page, that page is copied. Free pages are allocated from a pool of zeroed-out pages. 
If there is no free frame, the operating system chooses a page in memory to swap out. Uses an algorithm that minimizes performance loss to choose which to swap out. 

### Page Replacement
prevents over-allocation of memory by modifying page-fault service routine to include page replacement. 

A [modify (dirty) bit] is used to reduce overhead of page transfers. Only modified pages are written to disk. 
Steps to replace page:
1. Find page to add in
2. Find a free frame
	1. If there is a free frame, use it
	2. If there is no free frame, use a page replacement algorithm to select a victim frame
3. Bring the desired page into the free frame and update the page and table frames
4. Restart the process


## Frame Allocation
each process needs a *minimum* number of frames. 

There are two major allocation schemes: fixed allocation and priority allocation. 

### [Fixed Allocation]
allocates frames equally. e.g. if 100 frames and 5 processes, each gets 20. 
- Utilizes proportional allocation: allocates according to the size of the process. 

### [Priority Allocation]
uses a proportional allocation scheme using priorities rather than size. 
- If a process generates a page fault, the page swap in selects a page from process with lower priority number. 

## Replacement
#Global-Replacement selects a replacement frame from the set of all frames. In this case, frames can take frames from each other
#Local-Replacement selects from only its own set of allocated frames


### Thrashing
occurs when a process does not have enough pages and spends most of its time swapping those pages in and out. 

### Working-Set Model
was created by Peter J Denning, helps determine if process is thrashing. 
If (the total number of pages referenced in the most recent window of time) > (total number of frames), then begin to suspend some processes. 

## Memory Mapped Files
allows file I/O to be used in the same way as memory access by mapping a disk block to a page in memory. 

Kernel memory is treated differently from user memory. It is often allocated from a free-memory pool, sometimes needed to be contiguous. 

### Buddy System
allocates memory from fixed-[[File Size]] segment consisting of physically contiuous pages. Uses **power of 2 allocator**

### Slab Allocator
is one or more physically contiguous pages. A [[Cache]] is one or more slab. When a [[Cache]] is created, it is filled with objects marked as free and when structures are stored, the objects are marked as used. 

==PAGE 42==


